who
live okay thank you everybody this is
the town of Andover Board of Finance
meeting for Wednesday March 13th this is
the uh budget Workshop meeting so um
it's not technically a special meeting
in the sense that yeah I guess it is a
special meeting in the sense that it
wasn't originally scheduled with the uh
with the uh published uh um
calendar um so hey
Joan so just a couple of comments um
especially this is for those of you that
are newer to the to the to the board uh
since this is is because this is a
special meeting we cannot um change the
agenda or may have any substantive
discussions anything is not in the
agenda now a lot of what we'll be
talking about is the related to the to
the budget and that's a pretty wide open
Agenda uh for us um but that just to
just to make that point that if I reel
somebody back in it's you know if it's
something that really isn't directly
related to the agenda then I you know we
have to kind of steer clear that uh but
if it's something we need to talk about
it would be fine to add it to the next
agenda and as I think you all know we're
meeting every week from here on out
unless we determine that we really don't
need a meeting in any given week and
then we'll see how this all goes so in
tonight's uh so I don't think it's an
issue even though we're going to we're
going to switch around the agenda uh
order of items um so that we can have uh
the discussion of the ram budget the
presentation and also talk about the DPW
mower uh so that Jay and S Goin can head
on out don't have to listen to the rest
of our discussion over the budget
um Eric is the is the DPW thing likely
to be real quick or is that should we
have him go first or should we have uh
the ram discussion first do you have any
thoughts I would say probably Ram
discussion first okay um and then Jay
because I don't know whether Jay's will
go long or not it just kind of depends
on what the board of Finance wants to
know or hear or think or
do okay that works for me okay so um
well first thing order of business
though is to call the meeting to order
which I've done we'll go ahead and
recite the Pledge of Allegiance ready a
pledge of allegiance to the flag the
United
States through the Republic it stands
Nation indivisible liberty and
justice okay thank you so our next
agenda item is public speak Eric do you
want to see if we have members of the
public you want to
speak uh as far as I can tell the only
member of the public that's here is
Kirsten um Kiren if you want to unmute
yourself this is your your opportunity
to
speak no thank
you okay you're all clear
Mark okay thank you okay then we'll go
ahead and move on to the presentation of
the ram proposed budget uh Colin so in
your hands so Eric are you gonna allow
him to share or do you have y you should
be able to share right
now I
um well first of all good evening
everybody uh Dr Colin MCA superintendent
for Regional School District 8 um are
you able to see the um PowerPoint
slideshow your screen right now we're
seeing your background we're seeing
everything seeing your screen yeah so if
you run slideshow if you click share
window you should work out that way yeah
I'm G to try
to this is where technical
um this is why I shared it with Eric
just in case I had issues
so yeah if you can't I can pull up the
the presentation you could just tell me
when to click forward yeah Eric why
don't you go and do that I apologize I'm
I'm
uh that probably would be the easiest
thing for us to
do let me
so you you've got it then in front of
you now Eric I can't I want to make sure
that we're good to go yeah we're seeing
it y you should be seeing it now great
well wonderful I appreciate it sorry for
the confusion
um I'm I'm used to Google meets because
that's what we use in the world of
education so once we get outside of
Google meets it gets a little uh it can
get a little wonky for me I apologize
but I appreciate your flexibility so you
know again good evening everybody I
appreciate the opportunity to be here uh
again Colin mcar superintendent for
Regional School District 8s uh I'm
pleased to be here this evening to
present the proposed administrative
budget for the
2425 fiscal year to members of the
Andover Community uh I want to make sure
that I acknowledge and thank Andover
board uh um Andover citizens who serve
as members of the regional a board of
education uh members uh Kirsten eron is
is uh one of those people and I believe
she's here so thank you Kiren for being
here being supportive as well as Scott
soy yet um appreciate the work that they
do for the district and I I think it's
also to point uh important to point out
and mention I appreciate the work that
you all do as elected officials for the
town of Andover to support the
community um Eric if you can go to the
next slide it' be great
please got it great thanks so the
proposed budget for 2425 is currently
31,900
and represents an overall budget
increase of2
2.64% uh this amount is a combination of
a net operating budget of
31,42 40 and a capital budget of
$498,900 specific information uh without
first communicating with them about
those changes um we will be having a
board meeting on M uh this coming Monday
night um where uh some discussion around
the budget will be uh will be had um and
I will certainly make Mr Anderson know
about any changes that have been made
excuse me to the Region 8 budget and I
know that he will share those changes
with you so what I'm sharing with you
tonight is where we are at this moment
in time um but again we're looking at
some es to the good in the sense of I'm
anticipating being able to reduce that
current budget ask uh next one Eric
please uh andover's current uh I'm sorry
andover's member Town Levy from for 2425
is based on the percentage of Andover
students that are enrolled at Ram
currently um and currently that
percentage is
13.34% based on this percentage Andover
would realize a decrease of
89,990 $86 for the operating budget and
a decrease of
$1,127 for the capital budget over the
current Year's budget for a total Levy
decrease of
$2,123 next slide
please so the audit of the 2223 budget
for Region 8 was completed and accepted
by the board in our February meeting um
the board voted to allocate the maximum
allowable amount of the Surplus to the
district's capital non-recurring account
um which is 2% of the total operating
budget for for last fiscal year and that
equals a dollar amount of
$69,700 these funds uh have been
enabling and will continue to enable the
district to address longstanding issues
related to our athletic fields um the
additional $ 830,000
$212 in Surplus is being alloc ated as a
credit offset for each Town Levy for
next school year and in total this
credit amount for Andover is
$119,800
making the town levies decrease for next
year a total of$ 320
$923,000 so certainly good news for
Andover uh next slide please
Eric so there are several drivers which
are which are having a an impact to
increase the proposed budget for Region
8 for next uh over the current years or
for next year over the current years and
those budget drivers include things such
as health insurance um I'm sure that
you're talking about this already at the
local level uh currently we are
budgeting for a
16.5% increase um as I'm sure that you
know you uh Andover is a part of the
insurance Consortium that Ram is a part
of as well um and so the decision as far
as the uh member T um the the increase
for insurance is made as a part of this
larger Consortium um and uh right now
it's at 16.5% we actually have a meeting
of the insurance Consortium tomorrow
where the final number will be uh
established um for next year so that
number could change if it does if A
Change Is Made we'll know it uh by
tomorrow morning around probably 11
o'clock in the morning um but but that
is certainly right now at an increase
cuz our our change from last year to our
current year was a 2.5% increase um so
that is a a 16.5% increase is fairly
substantial uh we also have salary
increases which are affecting our budget
for next year we have special education
outplacement special education
transportation we have software costs
utility costs instructional supplies and
General Supply class as well those are
all things that are associated I would
say with General uh
inflation next slide please Eric if you
would please so the proposed uh
operating budget also includes some
significant reductions the notable
reductions include primarily the
principal and interest on our bond
payment uh as I'm sure you all know uh
the high school was built approximately
20 years ago and we are nearing the end
of our bond payments for the high school
renovation um and that was done again
which was done through bonding um
for next fiscal year the total principal
and interest payment will be
$421,500 from the current fiscal year
and and we're going to stay at that
payment amount of around
$420,000 until the uh bonding is paid
off at the end of the
2627 fiscal year so we're nearly the end
of the bonding period which is obviously
good news so it's a substantial increase
there we're also seeing a decrease in
general education Transportation uh
which is being reduced um we're seeing a
decrease in purchased and Professional
Services and the other uh significant
driver for our decreas is is the fact
that we are um we're kind of flatlining
with our financing cycle uh for our
district uh Chromebook and Technology um
so we about four years ago we put a
cycle into place where um we knew that
at the end of this cycle we would be on
a a relatively steady funding um and so
we're seeing a decrease of about $60,000
and it should stay relatively steady um
because of that stabilization plan that
we put into place four years ago uh next
slide please
Eric so this chart shows the percentage
distribution of the proposed budget by
each object category in relation to the
total budget uh and and as you can see
and certainly not surprising I'm sure to
you all 71% of the proposed operating
budget is allocated to employees
salaries and benefits and these are
fixed costs associated with Staffing our
schools next slide
please so the funds proposed for next
year's capital budget represent really a
small percent of the actual needs which
right now is around
$3,318 th000 of total identified um uh
projects um the proposed capital budget
for next year is
$498,900 decrease of about 4
$42,000 than our current Year's capital
budget uh the proposed budget will
enable the district to improve our
Safety and Security posture continue to
uh continue to address Rel um issues
related to the maintenance of our
buildings exterior and replace aging
Furniture fixtures and equipment and uh
the development of the capital budget
was a collaborative effort between
District administration and members of
the facilities and finance uh
subcommittees uh next slide slide please
Eric so this table provides a history of
budget increases for Region 8 and as you
could see the district has a
demonstrated history of physical
responsibility uh school districts
across the state and country are
contending with Rising costs and
challenging Economic Times and I'm
pleased uh that the proposed budget
increase where we currently are at a
2.64 is is reasonable when you consider
uh where we currently are from an
economic standpoint as a country uh next
slide please
Eric so this table uh provides the per
pupil expenditure for secondary school
districts Regional School Districts uh
region 8's PPE increased slightly from
last year however uh we do continue to
provide a a high quality educational
experience for our students at a cost
that is amongst the lowest in the state
for Regional Secondary School Districts
uh next slide please
Eric so it's important to talk about en
because it does have an impact on our
budgeting process uh the graph show this
graph shows the districts October one
2023 enrollment since 20 uh since 2015
as well as our projected enrollment
through the 3334 school year so they we
always project about 10 years out um for
the October 23 report to the state
district enrollment was
1,188 and uh as you can see the current
uh projections do indicate that
enrollment will decrease slightly
through the 2526 school year before
increasing to numbers exceeding our
current enrollment in four
years next slide please
Eric the October 1st 23 enrollment at
Ram Middle School was 369 students uh
enrollment at the middle school is
projected to remain steady for the next
three years before increasing um in the
2728 school year next slide we're going
to talk about the high school so the
high school enrollment um on October 1
2023 was 779 students High School
enrollment is projected to experience a
slight decrease through the 26 27 school
year before eventually increasing and
eventually surpassing our current
enrollment next slide please
Eric so this is our pre to grade 6
projected enrollment and it's important
to note that over the next 10 years the
elementary districts feeding into RAM
are projected to increase their combined
enrollment by over 300 students and so
this graph shows those projections of
the combined Elementary districts of
Andover Hein and marbor through the uh
TW 2033 2034 school year um the
projected enrollment growth at the
elementary uh school districts that feed
into Ram uh indicate that Ram enrollment
will continue to grow uh beyond our
current projections and what I mean by
that is as you could see the the
elementary enrollments are are going up
and so that means that that growth trend
is going to is going to continue to go
into the middle school and high school
over the next uh several years even
beyond our current
projections uh next slide please Eric so
in closing I would just say the proposed
administrative budget reflects the
efforts of the district and School
administration department coordinators
other staff and the Board of Education
to put forth a responsible budget that
maintains the highquality education um
that you all are coming have come to
expect and and appreciate from the ram
um from Ram um and and and and we're
proud to be able to provide that to
members of the Region 8 Community uh the
budget is a result of several months of
collaboration between school and
District administrators Department
coordinators and staff and is intended
to provide the board um you all as Board
of Finance uh and and board of Select
members uh and the general public with a
clear understanding of the district's
programs and priorities uh the
administration and staff of the district
are grateful to the support of the of of
our board the local communities of
Andover Hein and marbro um and the work
that you do to help ensure our students
are receiving high quality education
which prepares them to make uh
meaningful contributions to society um
our board of education is scheduled to
meet on April ail 1 to adopt the 20 uh4
I'm sorry the 2024 2025 budget um and
then obviously it would go to referendum
in May that concludes my presentation
and I am certainly happy to try to uh
answer any questions that members of uh
this group have for me okay thank you
Colin um I just want to make a couple of
comments just prefacing uh any questions
from the from the board of Finance I
think most of you are aware that the Ram
budget is uh both developed and voted on
and they both voted on by the board of
of uh the Ram Board of Education it's
also voted on publicly separate from the
town budget so it is a completely
separate process uh clearly it affects
the taxpayers the town of Andover so we
uh we appreciate the opportunity to to
hear about it a little bit and
understand it what this also does for us
when we look at projections they help us
understand what the future impacts may
be uh and I don't you know Colin didn't
have it in his presentation but I
understand that the percentages of
Andover students is expected to rise too
in some of the years coming so that's
going to have an impact on our uh budget
as well uh so just something to keep in
mind um but it is a separate process
from our budgeting thing it doesn't have
any direct impact in our budget it just
have it does have an impact in our mill
rate where we we uh uh collected taxes
from the town uh taxpayers so that's uh
that's part how it goes here so if you
have any questions about that we can
certainly talk about it so so anybody
have any uh questions or comments for
col yeah Rob yeah actually it's
something you brought up but I wanted to
drill down on it if we could the
enrollment projections and Andover share
thereof you know it was it was useful to
see that you know we got about four or
five years here where it's going to
either drop or stay level before we get
back above the current enrollment but
the composition of that enrollment of
course affects our budget pretty
dramatically this year in a positive way
um can you I don't know if you have the
figures handy or can provide them later
but it would be cool if we had a
projection for our share in those years
as well yeah so so it's a it's a really
great question I don't have those
numbers at hand Rob but what I can
certainly do is make a note to share the
Andover specific
projections uh with Eric and then he can
share those with with you all as well
I'm happy to do
that you characterize it really
accurately right so I think this is the
second year in a row where the trend is
is beneficial to to the town of Andover
right so declining Andover
enrollment which is leading to the fact
that you're seeing a decrease in your
member Town Levy a fairly significant
decrease to your member Town Levy um I I
I I'd have to dig up a report that we
received from nezda which is who we
utilize for our enrollment projections
and I'm happy to provide that report to
uh Eric I'll just share the entire
Report with Eric thank you very much of
course yeah I mean one of the things
that's been concerning with me is that
you know although we're down to you know
under
14% as a percentage of the total Levy
when you look at our prek through 12
total enrollment it's
16.9% which is another way of saying our
prek through six is greater as a
percentage than kind of the mean which
has been about 16 and a half per. so you
can kind of assume our Levy is going to
go up into the 17 to 18% range at some
point when that equals out so that's
just something that we as a town need to
be aware
of uh Bill s your hand up it just seems
like uh and maybe I I don't understand
but at the same time our enrollments
will start going up we'll also be paying
off the bond so that will help
offset and not make such an impact on us
as the uh enrollment goes
up yeah I I can't I can't really I can't
really speak to that I I I think that
you know you're right we're we're
looking at finishing you know payments
in the bond over the next as I said I
think what did I say 26 27 year 25 26
year 26 27 yeah so so the other thing
that I would say though is Andover is
not alone and I'm not I'm not saying
this to provide Solace or Comfort right
I mean you know I you guys are spoton
your your enrollment projections are
going to go up the thing that I would
say though is um the other Elementary
districts enrollments are anticipated to
go up as well right so so it's not like
Hein and marbor are going to Flatline
and stay relatively steady and Andover
is going to see a spike we're seeing a
spike in enrollment if I'm remembering
what the jections are are correctly
we're seeing a spike in enrollment in
all three of the elementary districts so
so in totality so I don't know how
that's going to affect your your
percentage specifically I think it's
it's going to be hard to to to put to
pin that down and say oh well you know
here's exactly kind of what the trend is
going to be from a percentage standpoint
sure other
questions comments Joan I just have one
quick question kind of a followup to a
question I asked last year so I figured
now was my opportunity just were you
able to um bring in any of the diversity
and Equity training and the PD line that
we talked about this this year and then
are you moving forward with that next
year sure that's that's a great question
and you know it's funny I I did a
presentation I did this exact same
presentation with Hein last night and
that same question was was posed and the
the the spec what I would say from an
answer is is going to be in general I
don't have dollar
budgeted specifically for equity and
inclusion professional development or
programming for students I have I have
money budgeted for professional
development for for for faculty and
staff and and certainly um we are we are
utilizing some of our professional
development time to to to provide um uh
PD for staff related to you know
providing um you know you know
increasing our staff's ability to be
culturally responsive the reality is is
that our our communities are growing
more diverse not we're not seeing jumps
in percentages of 10 and 15 and 20% but
we are seeing increases in the number of
diverse students and families that we're
serving in the ram community and so what
we are targeting our professional
development on with staff is we're we're
spending a lot of time talking about how
we can make sure that we are prepared uh
to be culturally to to have cultur
respons pedagogy and conversations with
our students because we know that that
diversity is increasing in the district
so it is definitely something that we're
working towards doing and and that is I
would say that's a marathon not a
Sprint I know that I posed it last year
because I know there was a line item
where you had said well we plan you know
we we put the dollar amount in and then
we'll have the programs so do you think
you had some programs in this current
year budget that oh absolutely yeah so
we we have a yeah absolutely absolutely
absolutely yeah that's thank you Colin I
know I asked it to you last year so I
figured let's go again thanks great
question other questions for
Colin Louise that you're raising your
hand yeah I'm curious if the increase in
population of the elementary kids are
you seeing or is there a way that you
know if there's going to be an increase
in the social services outplacement
in the F in the near future because of
the increase are are you say are you
talking special education outplacement
special education yes yeah so so we
collaborate very closely with our
special education departments you know
in the in in our district we communicate
and collaborate on a regular basis with
the Elementary District so we'll talk
with the special ed directors in in Hein
and over in marbor or the administrators
if there's not a specific special ed so
we we do we're we're we're very
fortunate that we take the students that
are at the elementary level who are
currently outplaced and we basically
anticipate that they're going to remain
outplaced for the following year right
and so there are opportunities for us to
realize savings there could be students
that are currently outplaced right now
either at the elementary schools that
might feed into RAM or current Ram
students that are currently outplaced
and through the IEP process or the PPT
process those students could potentially
return to Ram right and which is what we
are really legally obligated to try to
do our responsibility for special
education students is to educate them in
what's known as the least restrictive
environment which means as close as
possible to a regular education uh
experience as as as any non-disabled
peer and part of that Surplus that I
talked about I mentioned that we had a
surplus that again were is is really
helping out the three towns with that
credit
offset a part of that um Surplus is a
result of students that have been able
to return to Ram um and and that um you
know that had been outplaced and we
brought them back in District and we're
always working to do that but we do
budget accordingly for special education
out placements when kids we know at the
elementary level are going to be aging
up and matriculating into the to the
secondary
schools thank you sure of
course okay anything else for
Colin
okay I guess uh that'll do it so thank
you very much for your presentation and
uh good luck in the end of the school
year and the budget season so well I I I
just want to say that I appreciate
everybody giving me the opportunity to
come and chat with you and uh again I
appreciate Kiren being here to support
as a member of the Region 8 Public
Schools uh Board of Education I wish you
all the best of luck I know that the
budget process is not an easy one and
you have a a big task in front of you
but I appreciate your support for the
the the Andover students that attend RAM
and all the students that attend Ram I I
wish you the best of luck with
everything and have a great night thanks
appreciate it thank you yeah bye
bye okay so we will go ahead on to our
next agenda item this is to discuss the
DPW
mower um Eric do you want to lead in
open that one up sure so at this point
uh the uh request for both a DPW Mower
and a request for a new equipment
trailer has been presented and accepted
by
CIP um and the board of Selectmen agreed
with it also so now it's coming to you
as a board of
Finance uh there is money in the current
budget to outright purchase the trailer
so that's presumably what we would do
and then uh the other item which is the
uh the mower is exceeds what you know
what we have available in the public
works Capital Equipment fund so we would
be looking at a a purchase or a lease
arrangement for that um and that would
require a town meeting so prior to it
going to a town meeting the board of
Finance would have to agree in concept
ccept with financing the Beats of
equipment and recommend that to a a town
meeting uh as the board of Selectmen did
so it's really kind of in your court um
uh the information was in your packet um
J Tuttle can probably explain it far
better than I um so that's kind of where
we're at if that makes sense yep so Jay
I guess we'll hand it over to you um
it's all yours all right thank you good
evening
everybody um as Eric said
uh uh the more it's in your packet and
I'll bring it up here if I can uh share
it on your screen
here oh that's not the one ah hang
on
respondence
okay and I got to click on
share all right does everybody see that
yes okay um and everything was in your
packet now yep bear in mind what I uh
this pack packet here you know I sent
you both the uh Trail uh the roadside
Mower and the trailer so uh part of the
financing uh that's explained in this
includes the trailer but we would back
that out of this
um so when we went
to uh get quotes on the roadside mower
we're also looking for some
financing uh this company was
recommended um
by the dealership uh they're an
independent obviously uh separate and
they are Source well approved uh so I
reached out to this gentleman and talked
to him about
it and the good thing about this is this
company will allow us
to uh if everything is approved they
will allow the town to take possession
of the piece of equipment um prior to
any uh um payments so when money becomes
available come July one that would be
the uh time for the the first payment um
because it it helps municipality secure
equipment when equipment is
available so this is the finance
option for both
pieces and for the
single I was not aware about the other
so I don't have that dollar amount at
the
moment but it's somewhere I I'd have to
look it back up it's around
$47,000 instead of the
$56,000 uh a annual payment for the uh
um roadside M if you guys s like to do
uh this
option lease
payments you mean backing out the
trailer cost yeah yes yeah so the
trailer cost is around around
$110,000 uh so like for five years yeah
what's that so like 50 total
right five years of 10 right correct
yeah
yeah and there's no reason that we can't
Finance them
both it's really up it's really up to
the the board of
Finance um what you want to do um
ultimately because it's a future
obligation um even though we would have
the money for the first payment
now um we would need to go to public
meeting to approve because we can't the
board of Finance can't independently
approve uh a finance if we were
purchasing it outright and we had the
money currently in the budget you could
approve it all three boards would have
blessed it we could go out and you know
I could sign the contract for it
tomorrow but since it's a finance
Arrangement that would have to go back
to the uh that does have to go to town
meeting for for final
approval
Eric can you remind me what did the
board of Selectmen um decide on that
because like you said they I know they
asked you all to find the money for the
yeah to take part of it out like you
said the trailer and just Finance the
mower
right so I would actually have to look
back when I listen to that and I knew
something got taken out and they yeah so
we we we took out and separated two
smaller pieces of equipment that was Jay
presented essentially a request for four
pieces of equipment but two of them were
small enough that they were below the
capitalization threshold so the board of
Selectmen agreed and we just purchased
those outright with funds that we had
right um which left the trailer and the
roadside Mo okay so what you're
basically proposing is to purchase the
purchase the trailer and finance the
mower is that what I'm understanding is
the that's well I mean theoretically we
could do either we could Finance them
both or we could purchase the equipment
trailer now
outright and finance the roadside mower
presuming that we don't have to make the
first payment till July both of those
would options would
work okay can I ask Jay a question of
about the trailer and this is just from
listening to the presentation at the you
know when he presented to the board of
Selectmen I thought he was say I know
they have a trailer now that um you know
and I listen to the whole thing and I
understand the needing to upgrade the
equipment but one of the points was you
said that you can only use the present
trailer with continuing to make repairs
and repairs in town what would be the
big need I was sitting there thinking
because of course I can just listen what
is the big need to go out of town with
this trailer all the time well if we
have a breakdown with a a piece of
equipment that we have to take to uh to
a dealership to for repair like if we
got to take the back hold the skid steer
you know anything that another truck
actually you know anything that if we
can't drive it there we have to tow it
there um or we have to hire uh somebody
to come in and trailer it so and the
other thing is uh if we need to pick up
supplies uh catch Basin supplies
drainage um you know concrete products
um we frequently go out of town and buy
you know sometimes we just get one or
two you know catch Bas we can throw it
in the back of a truck but if we want to
get a whole load you know supplies
basins Basin tops different concrete put
on the trailer yeah if I if I know I
just wanted to ask that question that
makes total sense so you go out of town
a lot with the
trailer if when we need to yes yeah and
currently we can yeah okay and if you
look at the pictures you can see there's
a lot of items needing repair replace
mowers or the trailers in bad shap so
and that happens is there um if we
looked at uh maybe recovery sale or like
a used sale value we can recover if we
sell the used equipment yes 20 it's in
there right yeah on on the mower on the
mower itself well look before we get to
that part so one of the things that if
this passes and you know is accepted you
know and we're able to capitalize on uh
a unit that's in stock now there's
savings obviously and that's in the pack
it's it's explained um okay you know uh
from one to the next but as far as
resale value I mean I'm just going to
skip through this unless you guys have
some questions on the different
mowers
um so as far as the resale value on this
we're figuring somewhere around1 15,000
to
$20,000
uh you know 10 to 20 there it is
y uh the
dealership doesn't want to uh do a trade
in on it um they really wouldn't offer
us that much on it but the machine if we
did some looking around and checking uh
what's out on the market right now as
far as auction houses and Who's got what
for sale you know you look things up on
the
Internet the machine right now in itself
yep it's old it's tired
it's still a working machine if we're
going to continue to use this machine
and maintain it we're going to start
putting some real money into it and at
that point you're going to own it for
that much longer at some point it's
worth
nothing um you know and right now it
still has some value to it and I think
that's a better you know we get some
savings on a machine right now and uh
newer machine and we can also capitalize
on having some value in this and try to
recover some funds and put those back to
Capital Equipment uh if if the town so
chooses and as far as the trailer is
concerned
uh $1,000 $2,000 it's old you know it's
almost it's going of be teeter totter
and whether somebody will buy it give us
a little money or we'll get just as much
for scrap
unfortunately um can I ask a quick
question um as regarding leasing versus
buying so with the leasing option part
of the attraction is that we can get it
now even though we don't have the budget
money set aside if we wanted to buy it
out right you know if we decided look
you know what we're going to do we're
going to rework the budget we're going
to stick a bunch of money in the public
works equipment fund and buy it outright
for 240 Grand
um would we be able to do that and take
possession right away or does that
foreclose that option because it's a
different purchase process
uh I didn't even I don't know if the
dealer would do that that's what that's
what I was kind of figuring but I
thought I'd ask yeah I I would you know
because the the dealer is GNA get
secured payment from the finance company
right so um as far is I I honestly don't
know how that they're not taking r word
for it they're getting a finance deal
for a bank yeah yeah yeah this this
company that NCL they you
know they do whole bundle packages they
can like they're
taking uh the roadside mower from one
pie equipment uh one company and they'll
take the trailer from another company
and bundle it and they'll take care of
both parties they can you know
you know we could throw a truck in there
we could throw something you know that's
how that that financing company Works
they specialize working with
municipalities and governmental
agencies Jay so this on your list of
priorities that you would like to have
purchased do you see this mower I mean
I'm only going from some of the
questions that were asked at the BOS not
that I'm an expert this is high on your
list as you're just trying
to you know yeah that moving forward
yeah Yep this was part of the uh uh the
modernization plan and if I you does
anybody have any questions on this I can
go to that plan if you want to on this
pres on this packet I get out of for my
question yeah I just I think I'm in the
bigger picture mode in my head I
understand and I appreciate you always
coming to the meetings and speaking to
it um yeah so I guess down when it gets
down to when we're deciding overall big
picture I you're here tonight so at
least we're hearing yes this is very
important to you like this is something
yeah and I I get that no that's that's
all I need for my this is for
prioritizing later on yeah so this is
part of the modernization plan we're
probably uh if my I'd have to look back
at it again when we uh put it together
Eric initiated and then I tweaked it a
little bit and then we worked on it
again together um but uh I think we're a
year in advance right now uh as far as
what the original plan was we're right
at that year mark you know one side of
the other as far as and it's it's it's
time it's an opportunity thing it's time
uh um we're starting to put a lot of
money in it last year we wanted to put
if you recall we wanted to put a new
mower head on this machine and we had
some other uh equipment needs that uh
some major expenses we delayed that and
we fixed up and actually we're looking
at it right now this uh Arbor right here
needs replacement and this Arbor alone
is about
$7,000 but the unit itself
is also fatigued and we've had to do
welding a lot of welding on it over the
years so just this mower head is about
$22,000 is so that's about what we were
going to spend last year I think we uh
$25,000 we up to um but we didn't do
that we needed that money for some truck
repairs and some other things so we
delayed it and now here we are where
this other machine became
available um some decent savings so
that's one of the reasons why I'm trying
to you know I think it's uh a good point
to take care of
everything thank you I like the idea of
financing it and spreading it out yeah
yeah other questions for Jay
comments so you know just as a
procedural matter I think Eric explained
it clearly if we choose to finance this
which I think would be the logical thing
for us to do um we would uh be passing
this on to for a town vote a town
meeting uh so that's all that our vote
doesn't commit the town to it it
basically just passes it on to the town
residents to make their decision on this
option uh does commit us to us once we
have that approval so we don't want to
take it lightly but
at you know my my own personal
perspective is that as Jay said this is
kind of part of the upgrade plan this
thing clearly needs to be replac at some
point sooner rather than later and I I
get the sense you know the data is there
about the maintenance cost and stuff you
can see that in the packet we're
starting to throw good money after bad
at some point so it's it's probably time
seems like it's a reasonable payment
plan to
me that's my take any other uh
comments
yeah the only thing I would say is that
if you looked on page 52 of the packet
um one of the things shown there was the
original equip modernization plan we put
forth in 2018 and got everybody to buy
into and now we're basically six years
into that plan and you know we've been
able to kind of stay ahead of the curve
but one of the things that's been
hurting us is the costs for equipment
has gone up really really dramatically
over the last five years um but if you
look at it there's some pieces of
equipment we purchased a little later
than we originally forecasted and some
things we purchased a little bit earlier
we were fortunate in the 2018
1920 era where we had unexpended fund
balance um that was fairly significant
that we could use to jumpstart the plan
and we did um so now we're into the the
mode of just you know we're not buying
stuff as fast and we're spacing it out
more and we're having to finance it to
stay within the the capital allotment of
125,000 a year so that's kind of what
what we're on as far as a plan goes and
since a lot of the equipment we're
talking about buying is more expensive
than that you know plow trucks now being
you know 260 270,000 bucks a
top to use the
finance yeah they're not GNA go down
that's a good
point yeah
okay further comments or
discussion Mark I was just going to ask
at this point after hearing it so this
evening we could Mo mat R we know oh
that's okay go ahead we know that
there's needs to be a town meeting
there's a lot of things that the town
needs to be deciding on as I kind of put
in that email to you guys today I mean
we we know that I mean it's just kind of
so should we motion to are we at a point
that we would do that tonight to motion
it think add it to there's no further
discussion or question the next the next
yeah the next point would be we either
move on to the next agenda item or
somebody makes a motion one way you know
to approve the purchase and finance
option
just a quick question about that motion
um since the figures we have for the
financing option include the trailer and
we have we kind of we know roughly is
47,000 or something like that would be
the payment for just the mower itself do
we need that specifically we leave that
vague and just say in the motion or is
that a problem you know what I mean if
we're because my understanding is what
we're doing here is we're going to buy
the trailer and Lease the equipment um
and
it's kind of dependent on you as a board
of
Finance um given that the lease company
will allow us to wait till July to make
the first payment we can do either we
can take either approach we can buy the
trailer out right and just Finance the
mower or we can Finance them both as a
package and I don't have strong feelings
either way I mean it's simplifies it
from my standpoint if we lease the whole
thing if nothing other than we have the
specific numbers for that
to put in the motion
right yeah we don't need uh the the
trailer if we decide to purchase it
would not be a town meeting item correct
Eric that would just be a purchase right
because it's in the fund already yeah
yeah I
mean y somebody can make a motion to do
either
way I was going to say what oh sorry
what if it goes to town meeting and they
say no we still need the trailer right
so I don't know well if they said no I
mean the board of Finance could still
later authorize the Traer trer because
that's within your purview
okay and it's yeah and it's in the fun
we have the fund balance to do
it yeah it's not really clear to me what
the cost of financing is
but yeah I it's not a huge amount of
money it's over five years so I don't
think there's going to be a huge
material impact for the town by by you
know financing it if you give me a
second a couple I can look it up quick
just going to sure just gonna have
to mark from your experience would um
you know going out to the town for
referendum is it something that would be
easier to pass if it was a lower amount
in other words just buying the mower
instead of Mower and the trailer I mean
is it going to be easier for people to
say yeah well let's just go ahead and
spend the money I hate to see it get
shot down you know I don't I don't think
there's really any I don't think I've
been since I've lived in town you know
six seven years I don't think there's
been a town meeting where a piece of
Capital Equipment has not been
approved okay so I don't really have a
you know perception of what would be
more palatable to the town Joanne just
quick followup question question because
I really feel like the board of
Selectmen was was directing their wants
and needs of how this is handled and
passing it forward but I I guess were
the were the final thing but they did
have a definite direct way they want
they were hoping it would get handled I
know Eric and Jay were both at that
meeting I listened to the whole thing
how much is the total for the trailer
Eric and or
Jay on which trailer but like 40,000
roughly for the trailer seems to be
roughly 40 yeah I feel like they were
hoping that got bought outright that was
their plan because they didn't want the
financing they knew with the equipment
with our new and I'm just sharing with
this with all of you because I think you
all should hear thoughts of what
everybody was hoping for too um they
know that we have the plow trucks coming
up we're committed to different things
there's the fire rescue thing that's
coming in you know I know that's a
separate budget but we have a lot of big
things going so their thought was trying
to purchase find the money to purchase
the trailer and then Finance having that
one lump payment going like the five
years you know so that it didn't eat up
that whole budget every year with the
plow truck and the you know the cycle
that we're on with that I I'm sure I
heard that I don't want to be an expert
but about equipment or anything but I
know that that was their thought if that
helps with what we
do not to
interrupt yep go ahead Jay so the for uh
five annual payments the roadside mower
alone at the
23, 874 and change is
47,000
32776 for five years so roughly uh
474 for five
years okay that that's the cost of
financing
yes that's
for just the roadside mower
alone and then the combined is what what
you have in the
packet that sounds like some are you
talking about the payment or the cost of
financing
payment when I say cost of financing I
mean what are we paying extra as opposed
to if we wrote them a check today you
know oh I didn't do that 203 is the raw
cost right yeah 203
874 and
474 * 5 is 237 so you're looking
at3000
4ish how much you're paying over an
interest over4
35,000 oh so it's like 8% or something
maybe I didn't see the percentage in
there in The Proposal is it in there no
he didn't give he didn't provide that to
me just there you you got to figure that
stuff out yourself until you why would
they do that helpful
yeah that's why we're here to ask those
question right gotta ask those annoying
questions that's that's ouch it's a
little higher than
I but
okay but it gives us the issue is the
flexibility issue that we can take
possession right away yeah yeah well and
we're not going to frankly just not in a
position to write a check probably for
200 ,000 right so I mean even if we bake
it into the to next year's budg we jack
that fund up it doesn't become available
till July one
right yeah so that you we'd have to be
we'd be waiting for months yeah and
unfortunately this you know the the
machine is available now it's an instock
show unit if it were to sell to somebody
else then you know price only escalates
from there and then we're with waiting
you know uh 300 plus days before another
mower is so in the thck of the Season
yeah it it's just it's available now and
it's the same thing with the trailer you
know the the trailer is
35,000 the first option and the other
trailer is
366 you know for option two given that
cost of financing I'd say we avoid we
avoid financing any more than we have to
absolutely agreed absolutely
agreed now would we be looking to buy
the trailer ASAP then out of this year
well right in other words it would be
actually take place now in this budget
well fund obviously yeah there is the
trailer option number one the trailer is
currently in stock and if I if it uh
were to sell at 6 to 8 months lead time
at that you know I don't know if the
price would go up at that point but uh
and then option two is
only eight weeks lead time which isn't
that bad and that's $336,000
and we would take this out of the
Capital Equipment fund we would yep so
we would we we kind of we may want two
motions here or a two-part motion right
to authorize the purchase of the trailer
and then authorize
$7,400 by payments thereof to finance
the M exactly y
exactly all right anybody like to make a
motion I'll go ahead and make it um so I
move that we approve the purchase of uh
the trailer as
requested uh up to what was this higher
number
37 up to 37 up to 37,000
uh to be taken from the Capital
Equipment fund and then uh that we also
authorize the financing subject to
approval by the town at town meeting the
financing of the new mower at you know
five payments of
47,4 I second the
motion Bill seconds any further
discussion all right hearing none all
those in favor say I I live any
opposed we have any
extensions okay motion passes thank you
very much
okay all right thank you Jay appreciate
the time yep thank thank you for your
time and uh thanks for all you
do and good luck with the rest of the
night just getting started okay very
good thank you everybody okay we will
move on to our uh budget Workshop
Workshop session so as I I mentioned in
my email I think you we've got several
of these scheduled um I think uh we're
doing a little bit better job in the
files that are being presented of
annotating the details and we have in
the past so I appreciate that uh both on
part of Eric and and the various
departments and the board of Selectmen
um so uh we'll we'll do our best to kind
of make this as efficient as possible um
Eric uh I guess do you want to hit the
highlights then maybe and just go
through uh your discussion of the top 10
changes sure I can certainly do that let
me share
screen okay you should be looking at an
Excel spreadsheet right now yeah make it
just a tiny little bit smaller can
everybody see that yep yes okay so the
first thing I wanted to say is the
majority of the big increases in overall
spending and don't get me wrong there is
a lot of increase in overall spending on
the town side but the majority of it
relates to Capital funds um so uh the
biggest single item is the uh Andover
elementary school cap Capital fund um as
you know the board of Finance uh
approved adding a capital fund for the
endover elementary school that is still
under your control but that is for that
is recognizing that it's a town building
um in in terms of capital expense you
know much of that is on the town side
not on the schools side so uh currently
my recommendation was which the board of
Selectmen has agreed to is to put
approximately $100,000 a year into that
fund um in the short term the there's
really kind of two things or three
things that are on their their real
priority list the first is the repair of
the bathrooms in the original wing of
the building um there are one staff
bathroom and then one set of male female
bathrooms for students have been off
limits for the last 6 months because
there's a significant Plumbing Leak um
and unfortunately some of that's in the
crawl space but some of it is under the
slab and that is gonna that's going to
be uh an expensive proposition to fix so
that is the first thing is that we start
you know annually capitalizing that
expense so we can start start knocking
off some of the big expenses and I've
had a discussion with the school one of
the things I've said is that if we're
going to be putting money into this the
school has to prepare and show us a true
Capital plan because the only way we can
figure out how much we should be
expending is to understand over a period
of 10 years what are the likely issues I
mean stuff comes up but what are the
major issues that we're likely to need
to address so that is the biggest single
n um is that
one um the
the uh number two
is the total
budget for a community center so in this
number includes essentially the cost of
staff and the operating costs to have a
whole new building um with a director in
place so that is the the second kind of
largest you know nut um that we have um
and that is assuming a
full-time
director um you know and allocating
money to cleaning and money for
utilities and and programming
essentially uh some money for
programming
uh the third biggest one which is an
increase of
$75,000 is to uh fund the repair of the
Culver at Lake Road at on Lake Road at
Bola uh we have a state local bridge
grant that will pay for half of that
project but that still leaves the town
owing somewhere between $800,000 and
$900,000
and we're hoping it's closer to the
$800,000 but you know there's kind of no
guarantee is because Culvert replacement
costs have been kind of out of control
the last you know three to four
years so our goal is we've been putting
money in that fund now this will be the
fourth year so we have some money
established we're increasing the money
this year and next year and combined
that should be enough to replace the
single you know the one Culvert at Lake
Road um we still have two other coverts
that are classified as uh you know
critical slash fail um one of them is on
be Swamp Road which is a problem because
that's a dead end Road and there's no
other Alternatives if that one fails the
other one is on Hutchinson
um we do think we have an alternative a
lower cost alternative to not addressing
that Culver but what I'm saying is that
our costs annual costs for doing coverts
is not likely to go down in future years
you know as soon as we pay this one off
we're going to be putting money into
addressing the next failed cover and
that's going to extend you know for at
least you know the next 10 to 15 years
before we've addressed all the ones that
are in the poor or failing
category um Eric yep so is that
something that I mean we don't I don't
see money here to start building up for
those other two projects or however we
decide to do the second one but I mean
if it's a fail I think the way you
explain it to me is a number one or a
number two which means it's about to
fail be swap I I mean when are we going
to start putting money away for that I
don't see that in this in this
expenditure or am I missing it um no
you're not missing it so where I think
we're going to put a big chunk of that
away is um as you know um Bunker Hill
bridge is slated for replacement
starting this coming February so
basically one year from today we start
funding that bridge and then
immediately um and so we have a pool of
money that's about 400 50 or
$460,000 that we have in cash
now when that bridge is fully complete
the town will not have paid
anything but what we do have to do is we
have to pay the intermediate bills and
then we get reimbursed by the state and
federal you know government which is why
we're keeping that account there as soon
as that bill Bridge is basically paid
off off we go immediately into doing the
same thing for the bridge at Long Hill
which is again fully 100% funded through
state and federal
grants um but we're required to pay the
contractors and then get reimbursed so
we're going to need that money for
probably the next three and a half years
maybe four years at the end of that
period of time we'll have about
$450,000
we can repurpose and my intention would
be to repurpose all of that for future
Culver work um but the other thing to
keep in mind is we're only going to be
doing coverts at the rate at which we
can fund them we can get grants through
the state local bridge program um
because frankly you know we can't afford
to pay the full cost of replacing these
you know we have to be working in the
realm where we're at least grant funding
for half of the cost so I think that's
probably realistically four years down
the road um and we're going to Hope like
heck we don't have a major blowout in
that Culver um we have had some sink
holes which we patched um and we're
prepared to do similar to what we did on
Bunker Hill if we have to which is dig
real quick on both sides of the Culver
and then fill the whole thing up with
flowable fill um and then pave back over
it for a couple of years until we can
fix it right
so I'm nervous about it you know and and
I have there's no way I can guarantee we
won't have a failure um certainly if you
look at Colombia and all the surrounding
towns all of them have had to deal with
emergency major Culver repairs in the
last year or so because we've had so
much water but so far we've been kind
proactive in our maintenance of these
things so we we've avoided and we've
gotten lucky um you know some of the
major issues yeah that answer that
question sure does thank you good and
just while you guys were talking I
looked at the uh fund balance stuff we
have about
438 in the bridge fund that Eric was
talking about and we also we have this
fund that Eric's got marked is not sure
whether it still exists it's about 2
7,000 if you were to put those together
if we were to transfer the money over
you'd have 464 almost
465 potentially available in future as a
nest egg for these massive Culvert
projects right and and I am also as soon
as the Times Farm Bridge officially gets
closed up by the state we're
transferring all of the balance of that
into the the assuming the board of
Finance agrees because ultimately it's
your your call but assuming you're okay
with it we'll transfer all that into the
bridge and Culvert fund and I'm actually
relying on that money plus the 175 we
put in each of the next two years to
have enough money to complete that one
Culver right and that's
85,000 correct so that get about
550 right if again if we transfer the
the um
what was it the town
uh uh that fund that you had identified
is kind of just sitting there uh Town
garage fund so if you put those all
together you get to
550 yep and we can we can talk about the
pluses and minuses of of where to put
that money but yes that is something
that we should be considered um so
that's item number three item number
four
you know we have a huge increase in
health and dental insurance costs um
this is predicated on two things um the
first is an overall between 16 and 177%
increase in our average health care
costs and then the second thing is an
assumption that if we hire a new
full-time person for the uh Community
Center that person will likely be a one
plus one so I mean I'm not assuming
it'll be a full family plan but you have
to as a baseline assumption budget for
you know a person who has a spouse uh on
the healthcare maybe we'll get lucky and
it'll be less than that maybe we'll get
really lucky and they won't need health
care at all um you know but we have to
budget for
that um right the planning and zoning
commission has requested that and the
the board of selectmen's gone along with
grudgingly um adding
$50,000 to the existing open space fund
um if you have questions about that I
would suggest you talk to either the
town planner or talk to the the chair of
Planning and Zoning commission Jed
lson um adding
$50,000 to the multi-use building fund
that's a fund we haven't funded in three
or four years we had originally built
that fund up to pay for the community
center but we were able to pay for the
majority of the community center with
arpa funds um but we've now kind of
agreed to spend some of that money to
finish off the community
center at a prior town meeting we've
agreed to spend a portion of that money
fitting out in in finishing the senior
Transportation Garage on Center Street
and then presumably the town at a town
meeting will approve the town match for
the Steep Grant we got for the
recreational fields that will fund the
playground and the pickle ball HS so
with that we basically exhausted every
bit of money in the multi-use building
fund so my suggestion is that we start
annually putting some money into that to
keep that fund solvent so we don't run
it down to zero um the treasur has
basically said that although she's not
going to
increase her hourly rate that she
charges the town the town has not
budgeted for anywhere near enough hours
for her to do her job as the town
treasur um and so she has requested a uh
an increase and her
salary um the line item for the the the
uh assistant treasure clerk that is
would be an increase in hours from 30 to
33 a week which the board of Selectmen
decided was appropriate upon the
recommendation of the finance director
Eric can I ask a question right on that
one sure um because I know and and that
was my question you know I did see that
still on here so thank you for
clarifying um why it was such a big
increase because I know that they talked
about you know I think there was a big
increase asked for but then it came up
that it is a union position that was
just
negotiated um and so is it fair for me
to ask if it's been talked about if they
want to increase their hours I mean I
liked that compromise
but well to be honest I and I've been
authorizing her you know one to two
hours a week or a little bit more to
keep caught up anyway so I I think this
is actually a
realistic um it would be realistic to
increase her hours you know somewhat so
that's an approach I think is realistic
um given how many hours she's actually
working no I I can appreciate that and I
have some knowledge of that as you know
so I'm glad that that's the compromise
that came up um I know also
that
um you know so with the treasurers line
too you know because I think once she
finished her big project for the town
thank goodness for her like Spence said
and the board of Selectmen and our
things she you know finished her job
there I know I believe the assistant
clerk was very helpful to her during
that stage too because of course like
the assistant clerk said to me in person
you can't go forward without going
backward so they both came into
something that was
really not a good place to be they've
not only you know you know fixed
whatever was wrong went for you know and
now are moving forward so that being
said knowing that the assistant
treasurer would probably need to work a
few more hours because there is a lot of
work involved how many more hours is the
treasurer because working only five a
week it must be difficult when they have
to collaborate how many hours is she
willing to put in um for this
increase you know it would come close to
doubling the amount of hours she works
for the town on average so that would be
a significant increase and and in truth
I think right now we're still still
pretty underst staffed
overall you know in that department
that's probably other than me personally
that's probably the most underst staffed
portion that the town has um at least in
in my opinion um I would suggest at one
of the budget meetings this spring um we
should be able to get Cheryl on a call
and I think
that you know because I've basically let
Cheryl um manage that department and
manage her and and her assistant um so
it probably makes sense for you to hear
from her directly rather than me exactly
what she thinks she needs for for that
budget because I'm just I'm basically
being a proponent of what she's told me
she thought the other thing I think
we're going to have to face is that I
mean
Cheryl is not burning up to stay the
town
treasure um I think if we had another
option she would be more than happy to
step down I mean she has retired from
every single other thing an obligation
rather than us and I mean she's
committed to living in Florida half of
the year so I think we are going to and
and part of the reason why I definitely
want more money allocated to the on the
treasurer side is because I think in the
next year we're going to be forced to
look for other options whether we want
to or not because I don't think Cheryl's
you know Cheryl's certainly not staying
for years um Eric not to I I couldn't
agree more having had you know a few
conversations with both of them and
being involved when they hired her um
yeah we're so lucky they're there
getting I agree with you getting it and
I feel like a lot of work and the amount
of work that the assistant does now
incorrectly and getting many s you know
obviously through the direction of the
treasure has gotten all the systems in
place but still when you're the worker B
position it's a lot of time for that
assistant treasure so I see you know
watching the last thing fail that we
tried with the school and the whole
thing and I I couldn't agree with you
more so I think this is very important
so I just wanted to kind of see what the
background was with that and that would
be great if we could have Cheryl on so
that everybody could hear her thoughts
because yeah and that's all we don't
need to be labor it anymore I agree with
you I mean they've done a fantastic job
both of them getting the town in order
along with you yeah so thank you great
financially yes yeah next one up is
salaries for senior transportation
um so this has been a little bit of a
struggle
between
uh myself
and um Kathy pazi who runs senior
Transportation because she has been
adamant about keeping that budget level
but it just isn't realistic because we
overrun that budget every single year so
you know I went back for the last two
years and said okay on average how many
hours of driving do we account for in a
year and what do we need to budget for
that um you know so I upped that budget
a lot um kind of over their objections
but just
because you know she can keep budgeting
$27,000 but that's not what she's spent
so what I'm saying is you know if we're
going to drive 20,000 hours or or 2,000
hours a year which is what we do roughly
um you know we need to set about you
know
$44,000 in the salary line at there is
one employee that's getting a
significant
raise and here's why our longest serving
Transportation driver who is Ellie um
was hired kind of under the old regime
um at a very low hourly rate and because
we could wouldn't get any other drivers
that would accept that hourly rate all
the three drivers after her that got
hired got hired at a much higher hourly
rate and it's not really fair to pay
Ellie you know 16 bucks an hour when
everybody else is making considerably
more so one of the things the board of
selectman agreed to do was just level
fund all the drivers so the hourly rate
for all the drivers is identical um
you know so the rest of them go up the
4% that they agreed to for non-union
employees but Ellie goes up more so that
her so she matches um can I ask a
followup just on that just um so
understand what you just said is it a
I'm surprised how much we transport our
seniors you know for such a small I had
no idea is this only because I used to
transport my senior parents to all their
appointments and take work off of it is
this a a requirement that we do this I
mean I think it's great and I would
never take it away but is it a I I just
have never heard of this so is it a
requirement that say my father had a
medical appointment he could have called
his town and boom they would have
brought him so it depends it's not an
absolute
requirement um and remember we're also
getting even though don't budget it in
this line item we're getting money back
from the state or from the federal
government um through a specific
Transportation program to provide this
like a lot of towns have What's called
the dial ride program that's a specific
Federal program we do this kind of as an
alternative to that um so but yeah we do
provide overall we provide a lot of
services to our our
seniors but we also have a
disproportionately aging population
compared to the state in in a lot more
compared to the federal average age so
that's part of the reason you know the
average age in the country is 39 and the
average age in Andover right now is like
51 so we just have a lot more people
that need it and we have a lot lot more
people that are in that
category where they require you know
much more transportation services and I
have no problem with that at all I think
it's wonderful that we do it I just
wondered if we were required as a town
to do it because we have a lot of
seniors yeah correct wish I knew about
it sooner
y um other than that the next item up is
uh you know I would really like to be
able to hire somebody part-time
to function as a project manager um in
the way although this shows up as a
$15,000 line item um part of this is the
fact that I've agreed to kind of go
without a dedicated admin assistant and
just uh essentially pay Kate a stipend
to do both jobs um so Kate makes a
little bit more money but overall all
that saves about $115,000 a year by not
having a dedicated admin assistant
because the thing I need most is the
project management um the other stuff I
can cover but I just physically don't
have enough time to run all the projects
that we have going so either we slow
down the rate at which we're doing stuff
you know or we get some assistance at
that so that's that one quick qu sorry
that then we won't go back to it but
real quick so in the long run cuz I for
being involved I know how spread out you
are and I speak to it and you're you
know involved in everything you're at
all the night meetings all of that which
is commendable okay can I just ask what
this I I'm wondering I just feel like as
an admin assistant myself I save my
bosses so much time and energy by being
organized efficient and streamlining
everything so I have to wonder in the
long run and I think it's great for Kate
glad she's still doing it don't want to
take anything away but would it help
free instead of having a project
manager if we had someone organized that
could take all your calls get all your
stuff you know what's the balance of
that maybe working out better and then
yeah yeah I mean I I I I contemplated it
I mean the the things I absolutely don't
want to do um you know because I've been
stuck doing that before too and that
that's sucked because I'm not very good
at it is set up the meetings for all the
boards and commissions you know deal
with minutes um deal with the website
deal with some of the Social Media stuff
um that's one of my biggest headaches um
and one of the things the board of
Selectmen was adamant that when I took
over that we do we we make do a good job
of
communication so Kate's pretty good at
that so there's no question I can Pawn
all that off on her would I like to have
a full-time assistant absolutely um have
I asked for one multiple times yeah but
I kept getting shot down every time I
asked for it and then I really kind of
took a step back this year when I
started the budget and I
said as far as my time goes what's the
limit what's the biggest limiting factor
in me getting stuff done and really it's
the time dedicated to where where I feel
I'm failing the most is in keeping
projects moving you know because it's
not grant funding because we've been
really successful with that so we got
the money but we can't move the projects
along like it's taken me basically
almost two years to get both the major
HV projects for the town hall and the
fire department up and running and you
know we're going to be in construction
on those well we're in construction of
parts of that now but um you know that's
a lot bigger a
delay than there really should have been
um and I'm a couple years behind on
getting the senior Transportation garage
built now not all of that's in my
control a lot of that is shipo um so
some of that delays out of my control
but what we need most is project
management and people actually running
construction projects for the town and
so that's kind of why I'm saying I would
rather reinforce that than give me more
support from an admin assistant
perspective I would like both but I just
know I'm not going to get it no I
appreciate that I was just I know with
the funding do you mind if I ask is it
well maybe we should ask personally I
don't know what the stipend is for Kate
to do the extra duties so that's what
I'm trying to balance you know
stretching every and I understand they
don't mind doing that so I don't want to
take that away I just I I've often
talked to you about like the time like I
see you everywhere doing everything and
and now that you're proposing this other
position um I would have thought maybe
you could have been the project manager
if you were out more or even so that and
and I'm getting into the weeds so we'll
move on but thank you for talking about
it yeah I I mean hey if I ever found an
admin assistant you know that had a
decent amount of project management
experience I'd go for that but the
likelihood of finding that is about zero
so I didn't know if that could be to me
that could have been the Public Works
supervisor because I know we managed you
know we raised that level of that
position a couple years ago too so I
guess but I I'm not trying to manage
anything I I just kind of look at the
leaders at the top you know and what
goes underneath so yeah I I would say
Jay is probably as stressed out as I am
um trying to get through his day so I
you know best you know best I would
really hesitate to put more on his plate
um could he do it yeah but what would he
not be doing if he was doing that that's
you know okay
thank
you um and then the last one is I I was
just looking at so the the long-term
needs for the fire department so we
agreed last year that we would put
forward uh essentially a million dooll
financing package for tanker um and that
that's going to cost the town roughly
100 and a quarter a year for the next 10
years there is a fair amount of money in
the the uh fire department's Capital
fund right now because we've built it up
over a number of
years um we're going to spend about a
$100,000 of that fixing the HVAC stuff
in the building um and I'm probably
going to put a little bit of the cost of
the propane tanks you know in that fund
um I'm hoping to not have to tap that
fund for the backup generator money um
for the three facilities I'm hoping we
can grant fund that through FEMA um but
I can't guarantee it so just looking at
their overall budget um we've been
funding it at you know between 80 you
know 65
80 in other words I've asked for
125,000 every year last year was the
first year we actually put that in
previous years we kept cutting it um so
but but given that we're going to have
one single payment looming for 10 years
that's going to essentially account for
100% of that uh of our
$125,000 that we're putting in I think
that needs to be upped because they are
going to have to replace their
compressor system um there are a bunch
of other additional Capital needs and
that's assuming nothing goes bad so in
other words I think if we go up to
137 we can survive with that budget
presuming that they can sell both the
rescue the heavy rescue um and the
existing engine um you know which
they're trying to do now replace it with
the squad have one less total vehicle in
slightly lower overall maintenance costs
if that makes
sense um so that's the last so if you
look at the overall increase in our
budget
um about
$500,000 of the increases is the stuff
I've talked about right there so the
vast majority of the the increase in
what we're asking for is represented in
those 10 items um at the next budget I
would be happy to go through the start
going through the
uh budget line by line if you want to do
that I think that's
appropriate but the majority of the
expense change is right there in those
items go ahead Rob hand up uh just a
question regarding the multi-use fund
building fund yep
so I guess my question is you don't want
to run it down to zero because
you some of the things that we're
talking about maybe using that fun money
on I'm wondering if they're really
Capital like running the community
center or like you want to put money
back in there to use for what exactly
that's capital rather than
operating right we're in terms of
running the community center that's in
the community center budget
that's separate right where where we're
going to need a significant amount of
money for that building is we're going
to build it for under a million dollars
but the whole lower floor is not going
to be finished off it will be
drywalled um it will have ceilings and
walls and it will be insulated um but it
will not have bathrooms and it will not
uh you know have anything really other
than Heating and lighting so that's part
and the second thing is we are not
building the kitchen out at all we are
going to have four bare walls in the
kitchen you know and we know our our
final bill to actually build out that
kitchen you know is going to be in the
the 65 or $70,000 range so that part of
that money for the community center and
the reason why the the board and
actually the board of Finance agreed a
year ago to designate that money was
because we knew to get under the million
dollar cap we were going to leave that
out do that I remember I remember us
funding furnishings and things like that
that's that's not including what you're
talking about now you're talking about
more material upgrades to the facility
in the
future well if you consider kitchen
Furnishing um no no what I mean is I
mean we had agreed to I think a specific
amount for literal Furnishing but did
not fund something like making the
kitchen a
kitchen isn't that right or am I
misremembering well I I I think that you
know so we had basically said we were
going to account for somewhere between
125,000 and
150,000 for fit out of the building
that's not Furniture that's not tables
and chairs that's primarily the kitchen
and then potentially finishing off the
bathrooms in the basement those are the
big expenses associated with that okay
so well we did that were we under the
impression we had enough money in the
fund to do that but we're not and now
we're saying maybe not no we we very
definitely have the money available for
that we have enough money to cover
finishing the community center number
one yep number two the uh additional C
the town match essentially for the grant
we got to finish off the senior
Transportation garage and we have enough
money for the town match for the Steep
grant for the pickle ball courts and the
athletic field
upgrades but having done those three
things we've essentially run that fund
dry
and so what would be left would be the
the first floor stuff you were talking
about like future why I mean I I I can't
predict necessarily what the town's
going to want to do in terms of major
building capital projects but I mean
conceptually what we've said is that the
building maintenance fund covers ongoing
maintenance you know in the multi-use
building fund covers big improvements I
mean you know you could
consider um you know some of the stuff
at the school eligible for that fund too
it just it depends you know that's not a
me call that's a you call and a board of
Selectmen call but that's essentially
what that fund was set up okay all right
thanks I was just trying to get my arms
around what we're what we're thinking
that we we need to
build this fund back up to do so that
helps
thanks I think it's huge this year that
we see the actual balances that are
currently in the funds too I don't
know what
okay yeah I had that up earlier it's
it's helpful you know like there's
300,000 in the fire fund for instance
it's awesome seeing it I'm so glad this
is going to be so helpful because we
were always just trying to theoretically
add where could we maybe take a little
now we see the actual balance and like
Eric and you just asked Rob what's
spoken for already so this is going to
be huge you know it's kind of laying the
ground work before we so yeah thanks so
like for instance the fire fund you know
we have 300,000 in there we got 75k is
for the HVAC upgrade the truck payment
if we load in our usual 125 that Nets
out so we'd be down to 225 and Eric's
saying well put put another 12 in there
or so you know just to to get us moving
that helps kind of conceptualize where
you're trying to go so thanks for this
yeah let me just I'm still trying to
pull that up so we can all look at that
and I had all the I have so many tabs
open right now I know that's that is my
problem um
exactly um I have it up I mean you know
uh sure you can share it I just got too
many budget windows I can't find the one
I
want okay um oh there we go I got it oh
you got it
okay
good okay
so this is basically this shows current
balance of everything we have and what
we're proposing funding um and I can
kind of walk through that conservation
and
development um we had been putting money
aside every year to to fund the every
10th year plan of conservation and
development um so that fund had gotten
built up over a bunch of years we made a
decision last year instead of
funding a specific consultant for the
PCD we would just hire a town a
Consulting Town planner so now I'm
spending from that budget for last year
for for this current year and for next
year to offset uh the cost of the Town
planner so in two years instead of
budgeting you know
$36,000 a year for the town planner or a
little less than that 24,000 we're going
to have to budget an extra like I don't
know 10 or 11,000 a year so that's that
um reval Reserve every five years the
town has to do a revaluation of all real
property personal property um and
everything that expensive so what we've
been doing is we've consistently been
putting $166,000 a year into a reval
fund so we have roughly $80,000
available when reval comes which is
roughly the cost a little bit more if we
do What's called the full measure and
list a little bit less if we we opt for
a cheaper option um and that's usually
the board of Selectmen that decides
which route that goes um Town garage I'm
pretty sure you as a board of Finance
had had recommended you move the money
from the Town garage fund into the
building maintenance fund a couple of
years ago so I was actually a little
surprised to see that pop up still on
the books I thought we had actually
eliminated that fund um we do have one
big expense we're going to have to bite
off on on the Public Works building at
some point well two expenses one is the
generator for the building um is 56
years old um so that's a little long in
the tooth um and the second thing is
we're having a lot of spalling of the
exterior brick and we either need to
stucco the the building or we need some
kind of solution to decrease the
deterioration of the building um but I
don't want to talk about that right now
okay um multi-use building fund we
already talked about currently there's
417 in
it but we've already you know the town
has already agreed to spend money from
that for the community center and at
town meeting has already agreed to put
money into the senior Transportation
garage um and then we have the match
presuming at a town meeting that the
residents go along with it our match for
the Steep grant for the athletic
fields um Building Maintenance fund you
know we built that up over the last
three years um right now we have about
$135,000 worth of approved projects that
are underway so we're not not all of
that is going to go to that I'm going to
need to draw from this fund to pay the
contractors when we do the work a lot of
that we're going to get back from loen
um which is a state fund mechanism
that's available to us but right now I
need all of that money as a swing to pay
the bills until we can get reimbursed by
uh Lo siip um remember we also uh
dedicated $330,000 of that to redo the
uh windows and the doors at the end over
Museum as part of our uh blood money to
shipo to get them to agree to allow us
to tear down the old building right so
part of that is taken up and about
$112,000 was allocated to the bleacher
project which should be done in the next
couple of months so although we have
$150,000 basically the majority of that
is spoken for in the short term although
we'll refund a good portion of that once
we get money back from
Lo um Road Improvement in tar combined
um we have a fair bit of money in that
account our spring because we didn't
chip seal last year our spring chunk of
Chip sealing is going to be about
$180,000 so that'll take a big chunk of
that the remaining of that money will be
uh about
$60,000 worth of guardrail repair that
we need to do um I mean we need a lot
more than that but that's what we're
going to take off from this chunk and
then we're going to start doing the same
shimming program we've been doing the
last few years and a second round of
Chip seal later in the year so although
we do have a pretty big balance in that
right now um You can anticipate that
money will be spent including plus the
410 in additional funding will be spent
um in this budget season we try to leave
around around
$150,000 in that account at the end of
the year so we can get a jump on the
shimming uh of our roads to get that
done before July one because it's easier
to get contractors than it is right
after the fiscal year starts so that's
that um tree
removal um currently it says we have
44,000 but tenant has been in working
for like three weeks straight so that
number is probably depleted pretty
considerably we annually spend pretty
much our whole $50,000 allotment we keep
a little money in reserve in case we
have a big storm right at the end of the
year um but you know that's in the
$68,000 we will spend the rest of that
money um and we've been leveraging that
money because we've been getting the
utility company to work with us and pay
for for a significant fraction of the
overall tree work we're doing in town um
in fact not this year but last year uh
we spent
$50,000 and the utility company put in
like almost
$90,000 so we were we were able to get a
lot more done than what we had budgeted
for so we that's been really
successful um equipment
reserve of that
119,000 you can subtract
uh 585 because we have just made the
truck payment so uh that remaining money
will be the money that we uh pay for the
trailer and then presuming we do the
lease then when we refill the money this
year we immediately do the first payment
for the uh uh the roadside
mower uh School Improvement fund
a fire department fund like I said
that's about 300,000 about a 100,000 of
that is spoken for right now our
payments should start sometime in this
this next fiscal year so we'll have
$125,000 a year expense just for um you
know just for that one Squad vehicle but
they also need they have a bunch of
things that do need replacement they are
going to need to replace a lot of their
air packs that's a really
expensive um you know that's over
$100,000
$140,000 something like that to replace
all their air packs and then the second
thing is that uh the the compressor that
they use for refilling the air packs is
at its life expectancy so in the next
couple years that's going to need to be
repaired so I guess what I'm saying is
that although we have
$300,000 in that um you know we could
spend that really quickly you know just
on
Necessities uh pedestrian bridge
fund we're still trying to figure out
how we can because this was targeted
money that the the town was given for a
specific project like when we built the
pedestrian bridge um but since we don't
own that bridge anymore
but it was grant funding given to us
it's a little unclear on how we can
spend it one of the things I was
thinking of is that if we do the
connectivity project down Route 316 we
do have to make some modifications and
change grade right next to that bridge
and I think it's close enough we could
say that's all part of the Bridge
Project and spend that money on that
that's the only thing I could think of
again Times Farm Bridge fund that
$85,000 my intention is as soon as the
state finally gets around to closing
that project we're going to transfer all
of that money into the bridge and Culver
fund so we have enough to to do the
project um Bunker Hill Bridge fund again
that will be the swing fund money for
the next two Bridge projects which is
Bunker Hill bridge and then immediately
after that uh uh Long Hill Bridge um you
know and and at some point we should
start talking
about how and when we're going to what
we're going to do for financing because
at some point we will during those
projects there's a couple big expenses
we're going to pay pay like when we get
the prefab Bridge trusses where our you
know our one Monon payment is going to
be a lot more than
$400,000 conversation for different day
bridg and covert fund we talked about
open space fund that is under the
control of the Planning and Zoning
commission that is the the fund to
create open
space um to put it in perspective the
open space fund you know that the the
money in that accumulated over around 25
years the way the the way it works is if
you subdivide a piece of property
um the town has the option of either
taking a piece of that property for open
space if it wants it or getting fee in
lie of open space so the majority of
that money was paid in by people
subdividing in town and that's the towns
where the town took the fee instead of
the open space so it's accumulated very
slowly um land costs are you know are
pretty high um the the Planning
Commission wants the ability to jump on
a desirable piece of open space um most
towns fund open space through General
taxation so they've requested that uh
Severance fund this is a fund we're
required to have um that pays for let's
say an employee that has been here more
than 10 years and has accumulated an
enormous amount of sick time
they're allowed to be paid out one
quarter the equivalent of one quarter of
their sick time um plus it if they have
extra vacation time and things like that
so it's a an Actuarial thing we're
supposed to be maintaining is a
sufficient Severance fund um we ran it
down to zero about four years ago when
uh Eddie uh and Tim Higley both left in
fairly short period of time but
collectively between the two of them had
worked almost 60 years for the town um
and they both ended up getting fairly
substantial payoffs just by virtue of
having worked here so
long um hey Eric just one question on
that um is there a cap on I heard you
you know quarter of whatever you can do
but is there a cap on a vacation time
that you can accumulate like do they
have a certain number of days I forget
that I should know by yeah vacation time
there is yeah um it's for most employees
you know it's basically the max you
could accumulate in the year so it's
between two and four weeks for most
employees oh in a year okay yeah you
right yeah so like how many weeks you
can so it's for vacation it's between
the most somebody could r turn in a
worst case scenario an employee had been
here more than 20 weeks held over one
whole five held over five days which
he's allowed to from a previous year he
could theoretically turn in five weeks
of vacation and get paid for that okay
so that's that's that's pretty um St
okay thank you that's all that's you
know where where we take a hit is that
um per the union contracts and I think
it's actually in the personnel policy
too if you've been here more than 10
years you can take however many uh days
of sick time you have accumulated unused
you can get paid off for one4 of those
that you have and there is a cap but the
Cap's pretty high um so that that's
where we end up getting chewed up in
costs and why we have a sance fund yeah
understood thank you Public Library fund
that is the
fund um that that's not Town money that
was a
donation um to the library we don't
actively fund their Library fund that
was uh a generous resident who died and
left the library quite a bit of money um
in the arpa fiscal Recovery Fund that's
what we have left of our initial arpa
grant that money is basically fully
encumbered for paying for the community
center um so now that I'm losing my
voice that in a nutshell is everything
we have for Capital
funds um at least all the big ones you
know that have significant amounts of
money
questions further questions and or
comments guess one comment is
with respect uh to the open space fund
that's a kind of a pnz thing right we
might want to talk to
pnz about what they're thinking
about you know what they're marking that
for in their
minds since it's what they will ask it
for 50 and there's 234 in there now so
you know pretty significant chunk of
change in comparison to what there's in
there now so I actually if this this is
what I think this is and I think Eric
you already explained
it I'm inclined to agree if memory
serves years ago there was be property
that came up for sale it was Dirt Cheap
the town didn't couldn't pull the
trigger because we had no money in a
fund and we lost it uh because of that
and if this is something that would
allow the town to pounce on a piece of
property that would really work for US
expand our space Maybe along the rail
trail or what have you uh you know I'm
in but I kind of wantan might want to
hear from them about what they're
thinking maybe we can set something up I
don't know yeah if you want to hear from
the chair of the Planning and Zoning I
think he would be happy to talk to you
about open space fund and and needs and
requirement for
that when is the last time we spent out
of that Eric because it was a topic
among the board of Selectmen too you
know when they knew they were putting
forth a big spending package that
will'll eventually get to I'm sure in
another meeting I know we're in the
overview so they kind of debated it too
kind of like Rob is talking about um
they're like you know they're in favor
but is this the year to put it in with
all the other expenses so and I'm glad
to see we do have a sizable total
already so by by looking at these
balances it just gives me a clearer
picture so right so the last thing last
kind of two
expenses that we spent on was
last year uh we paid for a uh appraisal
of a property off of shotti Mill Road um
and we actually applied through there's
a state grant program um where the state
helps uh towns and municipalities
purchase open space to meet the state's
open space pools um in that particular
case uh we would have put up
uh every dime we had in the open space
fund um Joshua's trust would have kicked
in some money and the state would have
paid uh 80% of the costs to buy the
parcel we were trying for on shoty Mill
um unfortunately that got sold to a
private buyer um before we could go
through the finish the state Grant
application so you know we spent around
8,000 on the What's called the yellow
book appraisal which is what you're
required to do prior to basically before
you can apply for money through the
state you have to do what's called the
yellow book appraisal and then you have
to get a second appraiser review the
first appraiser data and also sign off
on it um so it would have been bigger
than it would have been more than 230
whatever our balances in there yeah the
the total purchase price was uh around
750 I think
800,000 something like that how many
acres do you
recall um yeah that
was about 160 acre
parcel um you know and it it also AB
buts um about 37 Acres of town property
that is landlocked so that would have
given us a a about a 200 AC contiguous
chunk had a bunch of wetlands on it but
they were very important Wetlands which
we wanted to conserve anyway so um
that's one example prior to that we
bought uh land off of Lake Road if you
know where the rail head the rail trail
trail head is on Lake
Road we purchased that and we purchased
about a 3 Acre piece in there out of
open
space um we that and how much was that
would you say uh I think we spent about
35,000 on that okay so it just varies on
the properties and different no and no
that gives a good overview thank you
yeah and and we also we had gone after a
piece of property owned by Town Tom
talbet um that was off of long hill um
and we ended up not doing that because
we couldn't afford we couldn't afford
the property so then we tried to see
what whether we could buy the
development rights and the development
rights would have taken basically every
bit or more than we had in the open
space fund so yeah I mean if if we're
going after big chunks of property um
you know which is what our plan of
conservation and development calls for
um you know we're we are going to need
additional funds in that um if we're
going to be able to do
that I just want to say thank you Eric
you did a great job of explaining all of
these line items for us so
thanks okay are you good with this can I
stop the share on
that
yes good with me okay okay okay well we
are about two hours into our meeting
here we've covered a lot of ground um I
would propose that we consider
adjourning and then you know uh carrying
on at our next meeting uh with the
review of the budget uh any more
specific questions that come up we also
need to schedule the uh uh and over
Elementary School um for their
presentation which um I should have
reached out them I probably should have
reached out them see if they they can do
next week if not we'll do the following
week uh see what's convenient for them
um so anybody else have anything that
the pressing that they want to re
discuss tonight I just ask oh go ahead
bill go go ahead Bill oh I just ask you
Rob has there been any more development
in your talks with Shannon yeah I yeah I
actually texted her tonight saying you
know uh we need to Circle back we
haven't been able to link up I've been
super busy at work and I I get the sense
same for her but I I did you know in
part because I I was reminded by the
fact that in this budget we're we're
potentially loading $100,000 into a fund
we have no policy for so I texted her
and said we really to meet um so I'll
work on that guys but I don't have
anything for you right now just a point
of order we really shouldn't be
discussing that on the agenda sorry um
the only other thing Mark is is what I
brought up before which is the pnz thing
if we want to hear from them if we want
try to schedule something with them yeah
if you if you'd like if everybody else
is fine with it and they don't need it
that's fine I just raised it as a
potential
thing what is what do you guys think is
a board I mean it's I don't think it
would hurt to hear from them would be a
first for us I think since I've been on
the board to kind of understand what
they do I do in general terms I that
explained it pretty well and I've been a
part of some of the discussions about or
at least have been Observer when some of
the discussions on some of those uh
partial issues have come
up I agree it's been a little bit
discussed in some of the meetings I've
been in and then with Eric kind of
bringing it together the kind of things
we're looking to do with it and the one
part of it that I think is part of
financial too and part of budget is I
know eventually that you know they talk
about the affordable housing and that
kind of thing and um that would be a
reason that they would have to get lots
of land if they want to start getting
that a place to think of where they
could do with whatever so if they did a
condensed like if we limited them to and
I don't mean to be
yeah overview because times we get going
on things and then we yeah yeah that
would be my thought a quick 10 minute
presentation yep yeah they probably are
at a regular meeting you know might not
be a bad idea to do it but uh we'll kind
of see where we go where we are yeah I
mean obviously as would be the priority
here get that we have budget document um
so we you know we have line on we can go
through it I looked at it earlier um but
yeah we want to hear from Val or whoever
um to present that budget to us the way
we heard tonight from Ram so if we can
do it next week great if not then the
following I
agree all right I guess I do want to
point out we do have one other thing on
our agenda and that's the uh approved
the draft audit um you know I don't know
if anybody has any concerns over what we
presented it would make sense to go
ahead and get that done unless somebody
has concerns over the audit as it's
written it is part of the packet if you
want to have more time to review it we
could certainly take this up next week
it's I don't think it's urgent right is
there any pressing on approving it or
receiving it er um we could certainly do
it next week we just got absolutely have
to make sure we've done it by the end of
the month because I want to submit that
the only thing I would ask that the
board is that you read
through uh the corrective action
plan um that is that I sent you that was
proposed
by uh the school
because I am very unhappy with it but
that was my question yeah at the end of
the day you know
[Applause]
it's you know the audit is one of the
responsibilities of the board of Finance
so I mean I I want that you know I want
your judgment on that not mine to go
forward can we move can m I would kind
of go with both of you if we could put
it off for one more week I've read all
of it and I was just going to ask the
question about I know we wanted to do
better with getting that submitted so by
the end of the month would be okay yeah
yeah our our current extension runs
through the end of this month so as long
as we hit submit on you know give the
auditor the go- ahead and we have the
corrective a corrective action plan we
agree with then we can we can can go
ahead with it um and if you did bring
in the the school next week to talk
about the budget theoretically you could
have that discussion with Val also um
you know about the corrective action
plan is next week's meeting a regular
meeting that we can adjust the agenda or
do we want us put that on their no it's
a special meeting I think so we would we
would want to have that in advance if we
want to talk about that we we need to
have it on the uh on the agenda that
would be my point agenda correct when
will you make finalization of the agenda
do you do that on Friday do we have till
Monday um well technically it has to be
posted 24 hours before the meeting but I
prefer to do it a little bit earlier
than that in case of a screw up so we
could do it next Monday um you know that
gives us enough time to get it posted on
the website and posted the in the town
clerk's office if we if we know we want
to talk about it we can just we can add
it in there I don't know you don't but
we can just have review you know it
seems like if we're gonna have the you
know we're gonna have them here anyway
we might as well if anybody wants to
talk about their corrective action plan
we should just put it on there just you
know yeah I mean we we'll go ahead and
put AES on the on the agenda I'm not
positive they'll be available but you
know that's we'll get do you want me to
reach out tomorrow I'm happy to do that
uh sure yeah yeah I'll take care of that
and then I would reach out to Valerie
and Celeste Willard OH yep absolutely
yeah they they said Celeste so yeah
include her for sure absolutely I'll do
that tomorrow then I'll let everyone
know I did read their corrective action
plan on for you all have but obviously
then if we G to put that on the agenda
for next meeting everybody try to take a
look at that
yeah yeah yeah I mean from my
perspective what they're proposing is
that they give the town financial
information once a year September after
you know uh three months after the year
is over and I don't that to me does not
solve the problem that that we have
um think it would be great to have a
discussion imagined your objection uh to
it I wasn't you know I'm not surprised
to hear you say that uh we' want to hear
from them what their thought process is
on why that they feel that's necessary
or appropriate or whatever so
understood can we can we actually make
changes to that or recommend it because
that's their corrective
action well remember too
that the corrective action plan
technically is my
responsibility the reason why I pwned it
off on the school is
because all of the audit findings were
things that were not under my control
they relate to things that either
occurred in the school business office
or relate to the fact that they haven't
shared information so I can't write a
corrective action plan because last year
I wrote a corrective action plan to
correct this but they didn't actually do
that so since they didn't do it it
doesn't do us any good I think it great
to have an open discussion with all the
stakeholders there because that's what
we were talking about you know let's
just you know we all I agree with you at
least they did present us with something
we'll all take a look at it on a fresh
brain and then come to the table and if
we can luckily hopefully get Val to come
too next week um you know she could be
busy but I'll propose it to her tomorrow
then we can kind of try to Roach both
things is your any penalty for them not
doing what they were supposed to
do they were cited in the audit you know
I mean we had multi-year the town right
got cited for years before we sorted out
our finance office right right with due
respect to the school they've had some
trouble in their finance office you know
so did we right we've got that I think
we've got that sorted now thankfully and
their argument is like that they're
sorting it they or or they're almost
there or whatever it took us years
longer than we wanted it to take for us
to sort out our nonsense so and and
nobody you know in the end we didn't
have our heads taken off although we
were getting close I think at one point
the corrective actions we wrote I think
were were appropriate though that's
that's one thing to consider we didn't
get them effectively implemented with
the treasur necessarily in place I think
that was the CH we
had L going on whatever you know it's
turn over we had all sorts of problems
yeah yeah but we I think it is
appropriate for us to make sure the
corrective action plan makes sense I
haven't had a chance to review it so
yeah have a look and you know we'll talk
about so yeah let's figure out if
they're available otherwise I'm good
Mark I agree I think uh my brain's full
yeah I'm happy to motion to aurn second
okay
so the board wants from me at Kim right
sorry yeah sorry go on
Eric
ask
sorry on we got too many too much
conversation goes got Eric go
ahead so as I understand it Joanne's
gonna ask AES to be available and
present at the me next meeting if I can
line them up do you want to hear from
Jed at the next meeting and what other
deliver do you want from me at this
point for that
meeting opinion availability for the
next two meetings in case I'd like to
stagger it if possible
as1 P the another if as comes back and
says we can't do the next me we can do
the one after then could we slot jet in
that kind of yeah the meeting on the
27th is a regular meeting you know it
might be a better one for planning and
zoning
that's a good idea
yeah fingers crossed we're able to get
Val because then we can abro appro you
know next week and then we can approach
some of kind of a you know we'll talk
about the budget first let her present
she does a good job at that and then
hopefully we can discuss a few of the
things that we've wanted to discuss
openly and you know get her input and
feedback as to why so without keeping
going because then we'll keep this
meeting nope I'm in approval of
everything you all said and then I'll
Eric in terms of You Know Your Role I
mean I don't know exactly obviously pass
on what whatever you get from Ram in in
response to our
questions um I had one question I
actually meant to ask this before I'm
totally St my mind on the revenue side
on our on the budget spreadsheet you P
you gave us I don't know if it's an
error or if it's just sort of a TBD but
there's one column that doesn't make any
sense to me where it doesn't seem to be
putting in the tax revenue to the total
revenue and so it it shows up as a
negative
366 per reduction in Revenue oh no you
know do you see what I'm talking about
well when you look at it just check um
on that when you have a
chance oh yeah okay so so in the
previous years's budget what we've done
is because you've passed a mill rate and
we know what we're asking INX
ation that money is plugged in there
yeah there's nothing in the line
for uh essentially current
year we're not accounting for current
year taxation because we haven't set a
mill rate so it's that number that's in
red is is since it's a it's a notional
we don't know yet number right that's
that's what the difference is just from
the standpoint about current year taxes
just because it's in red is that the
conern
I'm I'm missing it no no no if you go to
if you go a few rows down Mark what
confused me was Revenue subtotal one
yeah
226 yep know 200 like it's it's wildly
down from 10 million and St I see I see
yeah that's what confused me yeah so
yeah if you look at the formula not
adding number not putting it in yeah if
you look at the formula it's not adding
it okay got it right and I went to I
went to screw with the formula and I I I
broke Excel apparently because
I'm I I got all sorts of error messages
uh so I just thought I'd raise that but
that's what I figured Eric I just wanted
to know okay thanks yeah so the reason
is if you put it if you add that in so
it calculates at the bottom and you have
two equivalent numbers you get kind of a
circular error yeah because you generate
that number from the previous sheet
which then feeds this sheet and it
doesn't it has no starting that's the
error I got and I was like okay this is
beyond my abilities right that's why
that is the way it is I I was very very
confused but now I'm I'm good all right
thanks um yeah so we we do have agend we
do have a motion in front of the board
to adjourn not yet I have a
question about the budget or about a
joury yes
let's vote on the motion to adjourn oh
okay we have it before the board and we
shouldn't be discussing other things if
we're not going to
adjourn okay oh any discussion about
adjournment I hearing none we'll vote
all those in favor of adjourning say I I
I okay all those
opposed any extensions hearing none okay
the meeting's adjourned we'll continue
the discuss discusss make a note of your
of your thoughts and questions and we'll
have to